A tour of numbers
====

Edition: $\displaystyle \phi = \frac{\sqrt{5} - 1}{2} = 0.618$

2025/10

This contains the text of the popular science book, _a tour of numbers_. The book targets to present the historic introduction to numbers. As a central notion in mathematics, it connects varies of theories. We are going to introduce interesting stories and great mathematicians along with the history of numbers. There is **zero content generated by AI**, but 100% by human. We plan to release the book in both [English](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/23160228/amathtour-en.pdf) and [中文](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/22880853/amathtour-zh-cn.pdf) by 2026. We finished in 中文 ([PDF file](https://github.com/user-attachments/files/22880853/amathtour-zh-cn.pdf)) as of October 2025.

Contents
--------

- Preface
- Chapter 1, **Numeral system** \
    Numeral systems in ancient Egypt, Babylonia, Rome, China, and Maya. Show how language influenced numbers. Introduce the widely used Hindu-Arabic (positional decimal) numeral system; why it has advantage in calculation. Binary numeral system and computer.
- Chapter 2, **Zero** \
  The notion of zero in ancient India. Show how people rejected, debated, and finally accepted zero. The confusion and debating about negative numbers; how people accepted negative numbers. Explain why 'Two negatives make a positive'. Model the negative number through a tuple of natural numbers.
- Chapter 3, **Fractions** \
  Fraction and Pythagoras music tuning. Egyptian fractions; Babylonia 60 based decimals; Arithmetic rules of fractions in ancient China. Indian fractions and the symbol of fraction bar. Fractions and decimals, including infinitely cyclic decimals. Extend numbers with fractions.
- Chapter 4, **Irrationals** \
  **(a). All is number.**, The school of Pythagorean. **(b). Pythagoras's theorem.** Varies of proofs to the Pythagoras's theorem. **Number theory.** Pythagorean triples, perfect numbers, Fermat numbers, and Mersenne numbers. **(c) Irrationals.** Irrationals from the straight edge and compass construction. **(d). Euclidean algorithm.** Euclidean algorithm and irrationals, continued fractions.
- Chapter 5, **Reals** \
  **(a) Geometric construction**, Arithmetic of geometric construction. Coordinate geometry and geometric construction. Regular polygon construction and its limitation. **(b) Pi**. Pi in ancient time. Geometric approximation. Binomial theorem. The fundamental theorem of calculus. Series. Leibniz formula. Lambert's proof that Pi is irrational. **Reals.** Eudoxus's proportion theory. Dedekind cut.
- Chapter 6, **Complex numbers** \
  **(a) Cubic equation**. Geometric and algebraic solutions to quadratic and cubic equations. The arising of imaginary numbers in cubic equation. **(b) Meaning of complex number**. Geometric meaning and Argand diagram. Algebraic meaning as a pair of numbers by Hamilton. The fundamental theorem of algebra. **(c) e**. History of e; definition as a limit. Euler's identity. e and the logarithmic spiral. **(d) Pentagon**. Geometric construction of pentagon with complex numbers.
- Chapter 7, **Algebraic numbers** \
  **(a) Fermat's last theorem and complex numbers**. Infinite descent and Fermat's proof to n = 4; Euler's proof to n = 3 with the interpretation in complex numbers. **(b) Ideal numbers**. Fail of unique factorization in Lame's attempt to proof Fermat's last theorem. **(c) Gaussian integers**. Gaussian integers as an example of algebraic integers. **(d) Quadratic numbers**. Quadratic numbers and fail of unique factorization. **(e) Ideals**. The ideals as a way to restore unique factorization. **(f) Infinite sets**. One to one correspondence to compare infinite sets; Countable and uncountable infinite sets; reals as an uncountable set.
- Appendices and answers \
  **A**. Answers to all exercises; **B.1**. Proof to the commutative of plus and multiplication of natural numbers; **B.2**. Algorithm to search the 'best' Egyptian fraction decomposition. **B.3**. Even perfect numbers; **B.4**. Proof scheme of Gauss-Wantzel theorem; **B.5**. A combinatorial proof to Fermat's little theorem; **B.6**. Some limits; **B.7**. Tangent function in continued fraction; **B.8**. Formula of Fibonacci series through generating function. **B.9**. Wilson's theorem. **C**. Greek letters.

Install
--------

You may use [gitpod](https://gitpod.io/#https://github.com/liuxinyu95/algoxy) to build the PDF book from cloud desktop. (It takes about 15 ~ 20 min to build the workspace at the first time, while [later access](https://gitpod.io/workspaces) is quick.) For local build, you need TeXLive. We use LuaLaTeX, an extended version of TeX. Please refer to [INSTALL](https://github.com/liuxinyu95/amathtour/blob/main/INSTALL.md) for detail.

--

LIU Xinyu
